docs: frontend modernization roadmap (epic #3449) (#3467)
I-TECH-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2: specs/roadmaps/frontend-modernization-roadmap.md

| M1.f   | npm → pnpm migration                                    | Issue #3452                                                       | ⏳ Open              |
| M1.g   | Full TypeScript migration (big-bang)                    | Issue #2959                                                       | ⏳ Open              |

Then spec 016 nav work (M2–M4) unblocks.

---

## Artifact decision — where does work live?

This repo uses **three artifact tiers**. The rule: feature-shaped → SpecKit;
engineering-shaped → plan doc; trivial → issue-only.

| Tier                    | Use for                                                    | Location                                        |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| **SpecKit spec**        | Features with FRs, user stories, user-facing acceptance    | `specs/NNN-{name}/spec.md + plan.md + tasks.md` |
| **Standalone plan doc** | Cross-cutting engineering: upgrades, refactors, migrations | `.specify/plans/{name}.md`                      |

> | **Issue-only**          | Small chores, single-PR fixes                              | GitHub issue body                               |

Author: Fixed in 09cb11460 — tier table now points at `specs/plans/{name}.md` (the actual repo convention; `.specify/plans/` doesn't exist).

- `cra-to-vite-migration.md` — Vite migration (shipped)
- `react-18-frontend-modernization.md` — React 18 plan (PR #3448)
- `authoritative-harness-path.md`
- `e2e-ci-privilege-matrix.md`
- `e2e-ci-required-vs-convenience.md`
- `e2e-ci-trust-boundary-hardening.md`
- `playwright-quality-remediation.md`

Epic #3449 references `src-lint-cleanup.md` — that file does not yet exist and
will be created as part of M1.a.2 (#3460).

### Work-item → artifact mapping (this wave)

| Work item            | Tier                 | Artifact                                             | Tracker              | Branch                                        |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | -------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| Vite (done)          | Plan doc             | `.specify/plans/cra-to-vite-migration.md`            | #3312 CLOSED         | `refactor/cra-to-vite`                        |
| React 18 (in review) | Plan doc             | `.specify/plans/react-18-frontend-modernization.md`  | PR #3448             | `feat/016-react-18-upgrade`                   |

> | ESLint flat config   | Issue-only           | —                                                    | #3458 MERGED         | `fix/pw-retry-count-antipattern`              |

Author: Fixed in 09cb11460. The files all exist, just at different paths than the doc claimed: `specs/plans/` for active plans, `.specify/plan-archive/` for the shipped Vite plan. Updated each entry to its real location and renamed the section heading to "Existing plan docs".

2. Runtime canary: `cd frontend && npm run build`, serve `dist/` via outer
   proxy, smoke login + sidebar + one data-fetching page. Watch for React
   #130/#310.
3. `npm run pw:test` smoke bucket locally (never raw `npx playwright test`).
4. `mvn spotless:apply && cd frontend && npm run format`.
5. Diff `frontend/src/languages/en.json` vs develop to verify no keys dropped
   during rebase.
6. Close #3366 with a link to #3448 — its Carbon v11 bump is already baked into
   the Vite baseline.

**Checkpoint S1 (all must pass to merge #3448):**

- [ ] Rebase clean, no unresolved conflicts
- [ ] `npm run build` produces `dist/` without errors
- [ ] Runtime canary: no React #130/#310 in browser console
- [ ] `npm run pw:test` smoke green locally
- [ ] `npm run pw:guard` passes
- [ ] `rg "injectIntl" frontend/src` returns 0
- [ ] `rg "useHistory" frontend/src` returns 0
- [ ] `rg "react-router-dom.*Switch\|react-router-dom.*Redirect" frontend/src`
      returns 0
- [ ] `frontend/package.json` has no `resolutions` field
- [ ] `carbon-components` (v10) absent from `frontend/package.json`
- [ ] `en.json` diff: keys added, none removed

> - [ ] `mvn spotless:check && cd frontend && npm run format -- --check` clean

Author: Fixed in 09cb11460 — replaced with `npm run check-format` (the existing script that runs `prettier ./ --check`).

**Doc sync (S1) — ship in the same PR or paired PR:**

- [ ] `AGENTS.md` § Technical Stack: React 17 → 18.3.1, Router 5 → 6.28,
      react-intl 5 → 7, `@testing-library/react` 9 → 16
- [ ] `CLAUDE.md`: remove references to `injectIntl`/`useHistory`/ `<Switch>`
      patterns if any remain
- [ ] `frontend/README.md`: update dev commands if changed
- [ ] Constitution: **NO version changes** — after Stage 0 it has no versions to
      sync

### Stage 2 — Parallel hardening

**Goal:** ESLint debt burndown (can run alongside Stage 1).

Actions:

7. PR #3460 (`cleanup/frontend-src-eslint-debt`). Author
   `.specify/plans/src-lint-cleanup.md` if still missing.

**Checkpoint S2:**

> - [ ] `npm run lint:all` exits 0 on fresh clone

Author: Fixed in 09cb11460. Changed the checkpoint to `npx eslint playwright/ src/ --max-warnings=0` so it actually validates. Un-masking the packaged `lint:all` script (currently `|| exit 0`) is in scope for M1.a.2 / Stage 2 itself, not this roadmap.

- [github/spec-kit](https://github.com/github/spec-kit)
- [spec-driven.md](https://github.com/github/spec-kit/blob/main/spec-driven.md)
- [plan-template.md](https://github.com/github/spec-kit/blob/main/templates/plan-template.md)
- [Discussion #775 — refining spec after plan/tasks](https://github.com/github/spec-kit/discussions/775)

---

## Reference

- **Epic**: [#3449](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/issues/3449)
- **React 18 PR**:
  [#3448](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/pull/3448)
- **Vite PR (merged)**:
  [#3349](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/pull/3349)
- **ESLint PRs**:
  [#3458 merged](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/pull/3458),
  [#3460 draft](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/pull/3460)
- **pnpm issue**:
  [#3452](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/issues/3452)
- **TS migration issue**:
  [#2959](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/issues/2959)
- **Spec 016**:
  [`specs/016-unified-app-navigation/`](../016-unified-app-navigation/)
- **React 18 plan**:
  [`.specify/plans/react-18-frontend-modernization.md`](../../.specify/plans/react-18-frontend-modernization.md)
- **Vite plan**:

>   [`.specify/plans/cra-to-vite-migration.md`](../../.specify/plans/cra-to-vite-migration.md)

Author: Fixed in 09cb11460. React 18 plan now links to [`specs/plans/react-18-frontend-modernization.md`](../plans/react-18-frontend-modernization.md); Vite plan links to its archive location at [`.specify/plan-archive/cra-to-vite-migration.md`](../../.specify/plan-archive/cra-to-vite-migration.md).

# Frontend Modernization Roadmap

**Last Updated**: 2026-04-20 **Status**: Vite migration shipped (M1.a merged);
React 18 PR in review (M1.c); remaining milestones scoped and staged. **Epic**:
[#3449 — Frontend Modernization (Vite + React 18 + Carbon v11)](https://github.com/DIGI-UW/OpenELIS-Global-2/issues/3449)

---

## Context

OpenELIS Global 2's frontend is migrating from a legacy Create React App + React
17 + Carbon v1.15 stack to a modern Vite + React 18 + Carbon v11 toolchain. This
roadmap coordinates the interdependent upgrades, documents the sequencing
constraints, and clarifies which artifacts (SpecKit spec vs `specs/plans/`
plan doc vs GitHub issue) are appropriate for each work item. Several downstream
features (notably spec 016 unified navigation M2–M4) are blocked on this

> modernization foundation landing.

Reviewer: What parts of this roadmap need to land? It seems like it's M1.c and M1.d?

---

## Epic #3449 milestone state (verified 2026-04-20)

| ID     | Description                                             | Tracker                                                           | Status               |
| ------ | ------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| M1.a   | Vite migration                                          | PR #3349 (branch `refactor/cra-to-vite`)                          | ✅ Merged 2026-04-20 |
| M1.a.1 | ESLint 9 flat config + PW guard migration               | PR #3458 (branch `fix/pw-retry-count-antipattern`)                | ✅ Merged 2026-04-20 |
| M1.a.2 | `frontend/src/` ESLint burndown (~1098 err + 1160 warn) | Issue #3459, PR #3460 (branch `cleanup/frontend-src-eslint-debt`) | ⏳ Draft PR          |

> | M1.b   | Rebase #3448 onto post-Vite develop                     | —                                                                 | ⏳ Needed now        |

Reviewer: M1.b should have a better task definition (what goal does 3448 accomplish?)

> | M1.c   | Merge #3448 (React 18 upgrade)                          | PR #3448 (branch `feat/016-react-18-upgrade`)                     | ⏳ In review         |

Reviewer: M1.c should just be "React 18 upgrade"

| M1.d   | Decide fate of parallel PR #3366 (Carbon v11)           | PR #3366                                                          | ⏳ Stakeholder call  |

> | M1.e   | Post-merge React 18 stabilization                       | —                                                                 | ⏳ Follows M1.c      |

Reviewer: This feels like it should be up with the React 18 upgrade.

> | M1.f   | npm → pnpm migration                                    | Issue #3452                                                       | ⏳ Open              |

Reviewer: I think moving from npm -> pnpm is a decision that should be ratified by the community and not something we're just arbitrarily deciding. The advantage of NPM is that pretty much everyone has it, its easy to find documentation and examples and that saves us from having to answer questions. `pnpm`, while I personally prefer it, does have quirks that aren't entirely compatible with NPM.

> | M1.g   | Full TypeScript migration (big-bang)                    | Issue #2959                                                       | ⏳ Open              |

Reviewer: We should most likely break this down either screen-by-screen or something. I think this is one of those things where a big-bang PR is going to do more harm than good.

> Then spec 016 nav work (M2–M4) unblocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once M1.c and M1.d complete, this unblocks the nav work (spec 016)
```

Or whatever steps

---

> ## Artifact decision — where does work live?

Reviewer: The headings here imply, e.g., "Existing plan docs" is a child of "Artifact decision - where does work live", which doesn't seem correct. (Also I don't think the heading here is a good summary for what it's capturing. It probably should be `## Artifacts` with a first section `### Where does work live?`

Reviewer: Work here should surely include coding artifacts as well?

This repo uses **three artifact tiers**. The rule: feature-shaped → SpecKit;
engineering-shaped → plan doc; trivial → issue-only.

| Tier                    | Use for                                                    | Location                                        |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| **SpecKit spec**        | Features with FRs, user stories, user-facing acceptance    | `specs/NNN-{name}/spec.md + plan.md + tasks.md` |
| **Standalone plan doc** | Cross-cutting engineering: upgrades, refactors, migrations | `specs/plans/{name}.md`                         |

> | **Issue-only**          | Small chores, single-PR fixes                              | GitHub issue body                               |

Reviewer: This feels extraneous to a roadmap document like it belongs somewhere else.

| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | -------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| Vite (done)          | Plan doc             | `.specify/plan-archive/cra-to-vite-migration.md`  | #3312 CLOSED         | `refactor/cra-to-vite`                        |
| React 18 (in review) | Plan doc             | `specs/plans/react-18-frontend-modernization.md`  | PR #3448             | `feat/016-react-18-upgrade`                   |
| ESLint flat config   | Issue-only           | —                                                 | #3458 MERGED         | `fix/pw-retry-count-antipattern`              |
| src/ ESLint burndown | Plan doc             | `specs/plans/src-lint-cleanup.md` (to be created) | #3459, PR #3460      | `cleanup/frontend-src-eslint-debt`            |
| pnpm migration       | **NEW plan doc**     | `specs/plans/npm-to-pnpm-migration.md`            | #3452                | `chore/pnpm-frontend-package-manager`         |
| **TS migration**     | **NEW SpecKit spec** | `specs/017-typescript-migration/`                 | #2959                | `feat/017-typescript-migration-m{N}-{desc}`   |

> | Unified nav (016)    | SpecKit spec         | `specs/016-unified-app-navigation/`               | #3346 spec PR merged | `feat/016-unified-app-navigation-m{N}-{desc}` |

Reviewer: 1. Unified nav is blocked by parts of this roadmap, but should not be in the work items
2. The tracking of state here is weird. Just list the work item, the "tier" the "artifact" and the tracker. Remove the `(done)`, `(in review)` `CLOSED`, `MERGED`, etc.
3. I'm really confused about ESLint flat config. That definitely has an artifact, the flat config. I don't get why it's marked "Issue-only" either as its a concrete implementation...
4. It's not clear why in Tier we distinguish between `**NEW**` plan docs and specs. The state of the work item doesn't clearly matter for tier.

> ### Rationale for the split

Reviewer: What split?

`chore/`, `cleanup/`, `docs/` (verified via recent merged PRs #3349
`refactor/cra-to-vite`, #3461 `hotfix/useeffect-timer-leaks`, #3460
`cleanup/frontend-src-eslint-debt`).

Treat IX as authoritative for spec milestone branches; treat repo practice as
the norm for engineering branches. A constitution amendment to formally include
`refactor/`, `chore/`, `cleanup/` is folded into Stage 0 below.

### Prefixes used in this roadmap

| Prefix                          | Use                                 | Example                                             |
| ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `feat/{NNN}-{name}-m{N}-{desc}` | SpecKit spec milestones (strict IX) | `feat/016-unified-app-navigation-m2-backend-config` |
| `chore/{desc}`                  | Tool swaps                          | `chore/pnpm-frontend-package-manager`               |
| `cleanup/{desc}`                | Debt burndown                       | `cleanup/frontend-src-eslint-debt`                  |
| `fix/{desc}`                    | Targeted fixes                      | `fix/m1e-timer-leak-hunt`                           |

> | `docs/{desc}`                   | Documentation-only changes          | `docs/frontend-modernization-roadmap`               |

Reviewer: This section is kind of inconsistent with the above. So we're amending the spec to include `refactor/`, `chore/` and `cleanup/` (those last two strike me as redundant, but ok) and then immeidately referencing `docs/` here. If we're amending the constitution as part of this, we should also adopt the amended constitutions controlling conventions.

---

## Staged roadmap

### Stage 0 — Constitution & doc hygiene (prerequisite)

**Goal:** Remove version pins and implementation details from the constitution.
Move them to `AGENTS.md` where they belong. Verified against SpecKit's own
framing: constitution is "architectural DNA" / principles only; implementation

> details explicitly excluded.

Reviewer: I agree that these details do not belong in the constitution. Moving them to AGENTS.md alone seems insufficient. These are also decisions we need to make clear to human code authors as well. I would suggest we adopt a folder of Markdown documents, maybe in something like `dev-documentation/` or `architectural-documentation` which AGENTS.md can reference as well.

Actions:

1. Edit `.specify/memory/constitution.md`: strip § "Technical Stack Constraints"
   down to principle statements (no versions). Retain principle-level rules.
2. Move version pins (React X, Carbon Y, pnpm Z, Cypress→Playwright transition,
   etc.) to `AGENTS.md` — § "Technical Stack (Current)".
3. Formalize `refactor/`/`chore/`/`cleanup/`/`docs/` in Constitution IX
   branch-naming table.
4. Add sync-impact-report entry + version bump.
5. Branch: `refactor/constitution-remove-version-pins`. Single PR.

**Checkpoint S0:**

- [ ] Constitution has no version pins, no specific tool commands, no Dockerfile
      details
- [ ] AGENTS.md has all moved content, clearly dated
- [ ] Constitution version bumped per § "Amendment Process"
- [ ] Sync-impact-report entry at top of constitution

---

> ### Stage 1 — Land #3448 (React 18)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stage 1 — React 18 migration
```

Reviewer: Although is there a reason not to migrate to React 19?

**Goal:** Get React 18 on develop.

Actions:

1. `git fetch origin && git rebase origin/develop` on branch
   `feat/016-react-18-upgrade`. Conflicts expected in `frontend/package.json`,
   `vite.config.ts`, `frontend/src/index.jsx`, `frontend/src/App.jsx`,
   `frontend/src/setupTests.js`. Drop hunks already on develop.
2. Runtime canary: `cd frontend && npm run build`, serve `dist/` via outer
   proxy, smoke login + sidebar + one data-fetching page. Watch for React
   #130/#310.

> 3. `npm run pw:test` smoke bucket locally (never raw `npx playwright test`).

Reviewer: Surely we should also run the Cypress tests?

4. `mvn spotless:apply && cd frontend && npm run format`.
5. Diff `frontend/src/languages/en.json` vs develop to verify no keys dropped
   during rebase.
6. Close #3366 with a link to #3448 — its Carbon v11 bump is already baked into
   the Vite baseline.

**Checkpoint S1 (all must pass to merge #3448):**

- [ ] Rebase clean, no unresolved conflicts
- [ ] `npm run build` produces `dist/` without errors
- [ ] Runtime canary: no React #130/#310 in browser console
- [ ] `npm run pw:test` smoke green locally
- [ ] `npm run pw:guard` passes
- [ ] `rg "injectIntl" frontend/src` returns 0
- [ ] `rg "useHistory" frontend/src` returns 0

> - [ ] `rg "react-router-dom.*Switch\|react-router-dom.*Redirect" frontend/src`

Reviewer: Are we also upgrading to a new version of `react-router-dom`? That's fine if its part of that step, but why is it only surfaced here in the roadmap?

      returns 0
- [ ] `frontend/package.json` has no `resolutions` field

> - [ ] `carbon-components` (v10) absent from `frontend/package.json`

Reviewer: I'm very confused here. Elsewhere in the roadmap we're treating the Carbon migration as a separate step from the React 18 migration (e.g., "Decide what to do about Carbon v11"). Here, we're treating them as a single task.

- [ ] `en.json` diff: keys added, none removed
- [ ] `mvn spotless:check && cd frontend && npm run check-format` clean

**Doc sync (S1) — ship in the same PR or paired PR:**

> - [ ] `AGENTS.md` § Technical Stack: React 17 → 18.3.1, Router 5 → 6.28,

Reviewer: See my notes about how these decisions should be encoded in human-readable documentation.

      react-intl 5 → 7, `@testing-library/react` 9 → 16
- [ ] `CLAUDE.md`: remove references to `injectIntl`/`useHistory`/ `<Switch>`
      patterns if any remain
- [ ] `frontend/README.md`: update dev commands if changed

> - [ ] Constitution: **NO version changes** — after Stage 0 it has no versions to

Reviewer: Ideally this doesn't need to be said?

      sync

### Stage 2 — Parallel hardening

> **Goal:** ESLint debt burndown (can run alongside Stage 1).

Reviewer: This isn't a goal I can understand. Simpler to say "Resolve issues flagged by ESLint" or something along those lines.

Actions:

> 7. PR #3460 (`cleanup/frontend-src-eslint-debt`). Author

Reviewer: Why is this 7?
